---
layout: post
title: "Your Car Knows When You Gain Weight"
ref: hanvey_2019
date: 2019-05-27 00:00:01
tags: data-collection
notes: True
---

# Your Car Knows When You Gain Weight

[Link to article](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/20/opinion/car-repair-data-privacy.html)

While many articles focus on smartphones, home assistants and CCTV cameras collecting data, few writers have commented on the data collection capabilities of the automobile.

> Today’s cars are equipped with telematics, in the form of an always-on wireless transmitter that constantly sends vehicle performance and maintenance data to the manufacturer. Modern cars collect as much as 25 gigabytes of data per hour, the consulting firm [McKinsey estimates](https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/automotive-and-assembly/our-insights/whats-driving-the-connected-car), and it’s about much more than performance and maintenance.

> Cars not only know how much we weigh but also track how much weight we gain. They know how fast we drive, where we live, how many children we have — even financial information. Connect a phone to a car, and it knows who we call and who we text.

> But who owns and, ultimately, controls that data? And what are carmakers doing with it?

> The issue of ownership is murky. Drivers usually sign away their rights to data in a small-print clause buried in the ownership or lease agreement. It’s not unlike buying a smartphone. **The difference is that most consumers have no idea vehicles collect data.** [emphasis mine]

Other than pointing out that most car owners do not know that their vehicles collect data, the author also raises the point of independent repair shops not having free access to the data.

> Imagine visiting a medical specialist and learning he can’t get access to the medical history that your doctor maintains, or having a financial adviser acknowledge that neither of you can see your accounts unless you pay a fee. It’s alarmingly easy to imagine carmakers’ charging fees to independent repair shops that need access to vehicle data to service a vehicle purchased for tens of thousands of dollars. That fee will lead to vehicle owners’ paying higher repair prices just so that technicians can obtain the data.

This is a good piece on an unconventional truth and maybe there are other similar sources of data that we have neglected.
