---
layout: post
title: "Tencent's ARCC"
ref: tencent_2018
date: 2019-06-09 00:00:01
tags: framework commercial
frameworknotes: True
---

# Tencent's ARCC

([link; English transcript at bottom half](https://mp.weixin.qq.com/s/_CbBsrjrTbRkKjUNdmhuqQ))

*This is actually a transcript of a speech by Jason Si (司晓), Executive Dean of Tencent Research Institute, at the 7th Annual Stanford-Peking University Internet Law and Policy Conference on 3 December 2018. The following notes are based on what I believe is the original English transcript, which follows the Chinese translation in the above link. Quotes have been edited for readability.*

> Note that malfunction does not equate malevolence.

> As for AI, we have observed several such problems, namely, unintended behaviors, lack of foresight, difficulty in monitoring and supervision, distributed liability, privacy violation, algorithmic bias and abuse.

## The Four Principles of ARCC

### Available 可用

This refers to inclusive accessibility to AI technologies, fairness in the deployment of such technologies and Ethics by Design.

### Reliable 可靠

This refers to safeguards "against cyberattacks and other accidents". It also refers to "digital security, physical security, and political security, especially privacy protection".

### Comprehensible 可知

This refers to explainable AI and transparency. Si also explicitly mentions that "regulators need deep knowledge of technical details to supervise" these systems and the provision of "easy-to-understand information and explanation". Si also refers to transparency in AI development by cmompanies and feedback from end-users, including allowing individuals to challenge AI decisions that may be harmful.

### Controllable 可控

Here, Si places tremendous emphasis on human oversight - "make sure that we, human beings, are in charge, ALWAYS". This is cited in the context of a "deeply embedded suspicion rooted in information asymmetry".

Finally, Si ends with a brief overview of frameworks / rules ranging from non-binding guidelines to mandatory laws, across commercial, governmental and international sectors.
