---
layout: post
title: "University Is Rolling Out Certificate Focused on AI Ethics"
ref: council_2019
date: 2019-05-28 00:00:01
tags: education
notes: True
---

# University Is Rolling Out Certificate Focused on AI Ethics

[Link to article](https://www.wsj.com/articles/university-is-rolling-out-certificate-focused-on-ai-ethics-11558517400?mod=djemAIPro)

This follows the recent trend of educational institutions establishing new bodies focusing on AI ethics - UC Berkeley's [Center for Human-Compatible AI](https://humancompatible.ai/) and Stanford's [Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence](https://hai.stanford.edu/). In this case, San Francisco State University designed an entire graduate program revolving around artificial-intelligence ethics.

This suggests that the importance of AI ethics is being recognized. However, I wonder if AI ethics should exist independently as a course of study. More precisely, I think that it is important for ethics to be a core component of existing AI, computer science or engineering degree programs. The establishment of a niche degree like this does not solve the problem of thousands of computer science graduates siloed in their own field and fail to understand the social impact of their work. In fact, I would be inclined to recommend that the syllabus for the graduate program be made a mandatory component of all AI, computer science and engineering programs. 

And of course, while such programs might boost the reputation of the university, it really does little to rectify the ways of existing technology companies.

> “But it does little—and can do little—to address the economic incentives currently driving unethical business practices,” including discriminatory AI hiring applications or advertising platforms, said Ms. Cath, who isn’t involved in the San Francisco program.

