---
layout: post
title: "Why We Should Stop Fetishizing Privacy"
ref: messer_2019
date: 2019-05-24 00:00:01
tags: privacy legislation
notes: True
---

# Why We Should Stop Fetishizing Privacy

[Link to article](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/23/opinion/privacy-tech-companies.html)

This is a contrarian op-ed that is a rare contrast against many other pieces calling for more privacy.

As a disclaimer, note that the writer is herself a technology entrepreneur and investor.

In this op-ed, Messer calls for a more nuanced understanding of privacy. While not explicitly stated in the piece, Messer appears to focus on two important points - privacy in an absolute sense is non-existent in the modern age; there exists a trade-off/negotiation between privacy and resulting benefits such as free web content and services.

Messer suggests that proposing privacy regulations might actually inhibit competitiveness (citing the Europe's GDPR as a possible reason why European hasn't had any commercial AI giants).

Also, she claims that the likes of Facebook and Google, by using consumer data, have created tremendous markets, job opportunities and consumer benefits, which might be eroded by privacy regulation.

Finally, Messer suggests that instead of privacy regulation, market forces might already be sufficient to deter or punish excessive privacy infringements. 

> But if a platform violates their trust, [digital natives] stop using it.

Messer raises some good points here. I agree that the concept of privacy has been somewhat "fetishized" by the media and civil rights groups. However, I am also doubtful that market forces are sufficient to protect consumer interests. After all, look at the environmental damage we have wrought. What I am certain of at the moment is that it is good that we are all talking about this in the public domain and raising public awareness about such issues, while there is still time to decide how and what to regulate.
