---
layout: post
title: "San Francisco Is Right: Facial Recognition Must Be Put On Hold"
ref: manjoo_2019
date: 2019-05-24 00:00:01
tags: facial-recognition legislation
notes: True
---

# San Francisco Is Right: Facial Recognition Must Be Put On Hold

[Link to article](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/16/opinion/columnists/facial-recognition-ban-privacy.html)

This op-ed begins by framing facial recognition as an evolution of the camera. More precisely, Manjoo begins with cameras getting cheaper and more proliferate and powering social media and other internet content.

> Cheap, ubiquitous, viral photography has fed social movements like Black Lives Matter, but cameras are already prompting more problems than we know what to do with — revenge porn, live-streamed terrorism, YouTube reactionaries and other photographic ills.

Like some of the other writers who stand for a slower uptake of facial recognition, the arguments here construe facial recognition as a more ubiquitous form of fingerprinting and DNA scanning.

> I’m less optimistic, and so is Ms. Garvie. “Face recognition gives law enforcement a unique ability that they’ve never had before,” Ms. Garvie told me. “That’s the ability to conduct biometric surveillance — the ability to see not just what is happening on the ground but who is doing it. This has never been possible before. We’ve never been able to take mass fingerprint scans of a group of people in secret. We’ve never been able to do that with DNA. Now we can with face scans.”

The article goes further to quote fascinating examples from Garvie's reports ([here](https://www.americaunderwatch.com/) and [here](https://www.flawedfacedata.com/)), including cases where law enforcement use photo composites, celebrity photos and forensic sketches with facial recognition systems.

> The most troubling thing about all of this is that there are almost no rules governing its use. “If we were to find out that a fingerprint analyst were drawing in where he thought the missing lines of a fingerprint were, that would be grounds for a mistrial,” Ms. Garvie said.

> But people are being arrested, charged and convicted based on similar practices in face searches. And because there are no mandates about what defendants and their attorneys must be told about these searches, the police are allowed to act with impunity.

This points to a lagging legislation that allows different actors to operate in fuzzy gray areas.
