---
layout: post
title: "Trump's social media bias reporting project is a data collection tool in disguise"
ref: newton_2019
date: 2019-05-24 00:00:01
tags: bias privacy
notes: True
---

# Trump's social media bias reporting project is a data collection tool in disguise

[Link to article](https://www.theverge.com/interface/2019/5/16/18627096/trump-social-media-bias-reporting-scam-christchurch-call)

This article examines a more political (and somewhat misunderstood) aspect of "bias", one that was repeated over and over in the Congress hearings with Mark Zuckerberg, Sundar Pichai and Jack Dorsey - that "Facebook 'routinely suppressed conservative news'" and "Rep. Steve King (R-IA) asked Pichai why his granddaughter saw negative news about him on her iPhone." (from [this Wired article](https://www.wired.com/story/congress-sundar-pichai-google-ceo-hearing/)).

Specifically, the article touches on a "new tool" from the Trump administration.

> On Wednesday, the White House [launched a new tool](https://whitehouse.typeform.com/to/Jti9QH) for people to use if they feel they’ve been wrongly censored, banned, or suspended on social media platforms like Facebook and Twitter.

To quote from the "new White House tool" (a Typeform survey):

> "Too many Americans have seen their accounts suspended, banned, or fraudulently reported for unclear 'violations' of user policies," the site reads. "No matter your views, if you suspect political bias caused such an action to be taken against you, share your story with President Trump."

The article postulates that the "tool" might just be a way for the Trump administration to collect information on voters to target. But aside from that, the article provides a good analysis on current (mis-)interpretation of bias.

> In the meantime, "bias" is defined ever downward. In conservative parlance, it now refers to any instance in which the user of a social platform did not have a desired outcome. You didn’t appear high enough in search results? Your video wasn’t promoted by an algorithm? You were suspended for threatening to kill someone? It’s all just "bias" now.

> And for platforms, that presents a devilish trap. With the definition of "bias" constantly expanding, it becomes harder and harder to argue that it doesn’t happen. Social networks often do make mistakes around content moderation, which they have outsourced to an army of underpaid workers who must deal with near-daily changes to community standards. But the larger truth — that conservatives are thriving in part due to their mastery of social platforms like Facebook and YouTube — forever goes unsaid.

This is an important point that deserve more substantiation.
