---
layout: post
title: "Businesses Defend Use of Biometrics Amid Facial-Recognition Backlash"
ref: murawski_2019
date: 2019-05-23 00:00:01
tags: facial-recognition law-enforcement healthcare transport
notes: True
---

# Businesses Defend Use of Biometrics Amid Facial-Recognition Backlash

[Link to article](https://www.wsj.com/articles/businesses-defend-use-of-biometrics-amid-facial-recognition-backlash-11558603800?mod=djemAIPro)

This article is one of many run-in-the-mill articles on facial recognition and privacy. However, the nice thing here about this article is that it contains several responses from different business-owners on government legislation around privacy and facial recognition technology.

Would be a good source for citing opinions of business owners.

> “There’s obviously a worry that there will be a lot more hesitance of enterprises to adopt the technology because facial recognition is associated with a dirty word.”

> Rustom Kanga, chief executive of Australia-based iOmniscient Pty Ltd., which makes technology that can be used to help find missing persons or locate people who abandoned their bags at airports, said he is uneasy about the legislative momentum to regulate facial recognition. “I don’t feel confident the right decisions will be made,” Mr. Kanga said.

> Users of facial-recognition systems include companies such as Madison Square Garden Co., which uses the technology for maintaining public safety; JetBlue Airways Corp., for automating the boarding process; and HSBC Holdings PLC, for authenticating customer identities to access bank accounts.

> “The way to do this right so it doesn’t invite a backlash is do it with some level of consent,” Mr. Whitehouse said. “The climate we’re in today, there’s folks who’ve had too much of their information mined without their consent.” 

The article also showcases some interesting applications of facial recognition including for medical diagnosis (Nemours Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children) and for monitoring if truck drivers are alert on long-haul journeys (Royal Food Service Inc.). 

In the above applications, it is not so much *facial recognition* as it is facial diagnosis. Maybe consider amending the phrase to be more comprehensive and "truthful".
